Migrate Jetty Proxy to Airlift (#382)
trinodb/trino-gateway: docs/migration-to-airlift.md

# Migration to Airlift

The codebase of Trino Gateway has been heavily upgraded to meet the Trino
standards. Dropwizard and Jetty Proxy has been replaced by Airbase and Airlift.
This page documents the incompatible changes and aims to smooth the migration.
The migration is only required for user using Trino Gateway before version 10.

> ## Change of endpoints

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Change of endpoints

You have to make the following adjustments to take the change to using only one HTTP port into account.

```

> ### Merge of service ports

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Merge of service ports

```

Multiple service ports have been merged together. The old version
listens to multiple ports: request service at port 9080, application service
at port 9081, and the Admin service at port 9082. The new version only

> listens to one single port.

Reviewer: Add what the default is for that single port.

> ### Merge of request service and application service (:9080 and :9081)

Reviewer: I think you can leave the ports out of the title here

Requests to the Trino Gateway (Web UI and RESTful API) and requests that need to
be forwarded to Trino are both served by the same port. The destination is
determined by the HTTP URI in the request.

> ### Removal of Admin service (:9082)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Removal of the Dropwizard admin service at port 9082

```

The admin console page provided by Dropwizard (port 9082) has been removed.
JMX can be viewed at `/v1/jmx`. There are no plans to support other functions on

> the Dropwizard Admin page.

Reviewer: What was even useful there?

> ### Path change for WebUI

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Path change for WebUI

```

The root path for Trino Gateway WebUI has been changed from `/` to

> `/trino-gateway`. By default, access to `/` will be redirected to `/trino-gateway`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`/trino-gateway`. By default, access to `/` is redirected to `/trino-gateway`.
```

This behavior can be changed by adding `/` to `extraWhitelistPaths`, which

> will route `/` to Trino.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
results in routing `/` to Trino.
```

> ## Change of configuration

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Change of configuration

You must adjust your configuration to the following changes.

```

> ### Change of service ports

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Change of service ports

```

`requestRouter`, `server`, `applicationConnectors`, and `adminConnectors`

> have been replaced by `serverConfig`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
are replaced by `serverConfig`.
```

Old config:
```yaml
requestRouter:
    port: 8080
    name: trinoRouter
    historySize: 1000
    requestBufferSize: 8192
server:
    applicationConnectors:
        - type: http
          port: 8090
          useForwardedHeaders: true
    adminConnectors:
        - type: http
          port: 8091
          useForwardedHeaders: true
```

New config:
```yaml
serverConfig:
    node.environment: test
    http-server.http.port: 8443
    proxy.http-client.request-buffer-size: 8kB
```

> ### TLS Config

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### TLS configuration

```

> `ssl`, `keystorePath`, and `keystorePass` have been replaced by

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`ssl`, `keystorePath`, and `keystorePass` are replaced by
```

> `http-server.https.*`. For more details, see: [Security](security.md)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`http-server.https.*`. For more details, see [Security](security.md)
```

Old config:
```yaml
requestRouter:
  ssl: true
  port: 8080
  name: trinoRouter
  historySize: 1000
  keystorePath: <path>
  keystorePass: <password>

server:
  applicationConnectors:
    - type: https
      port: 8090
      keyStorePath: <path>
      keyStorePassword: <password>
      useForwardedHeaders: true
  adminConnectors:
    - type: https
      port: 8091
      keyStorePath: <path>
      keyStorePassword: <password>
      useForwardedHeaders: true
```

New config:
```yaml
serverConfig:
    http-server.http.enabled: false
    http-server.https.enabled: true
    http-server.https.port: 8080
    http-server.https.keystore.path: <path>
    http-server.https.keystore.key: <password>
```

> ### Logging

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Logging

```

Old config:

* Set logging to external
```yaml
logging:
    type: external
```
* Also specify the path to the `log.properties` file using the `log.levels-file`
  JVM options, such as `-Dlog.levels-file=etc/log.properties`.

New config:

* Specify the path to the `log.properties` file in config
```yaml
serverConfig:
    log.levels-file: gateway-ha/etc/log.properties
```
*  The `log.levels-file` JVM option is no longer supported.

> ### Startup arguments

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### JVM startup arguments

```

> The first arg `server` has been removed.

Reviewer: Doesnt that just use the server mode for the JVM and we still probably want that?

Author: Nope, that's the dropwizard thing.
https://www.dropwizard.io/en/stable/getting-started.html#running-your-application

I think `-server` is almost the default option in modern JDK and we don't need to set it.

Old config:
```bash
java -jar gateway-ha.jar server gateway-config.yml
```

New config:
```bash
java -jar gateway-ha.jar gateway-config.yml
```

> ### Format of `extraWhitelistPaths`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Format of `extraWhitelistPaths`

```

> The path setting in `extraWhitelistPaths` is now a regex matches the full

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The path setting in `extraWhitelistPaths` is now a regex that matches the full
```

> URI in request. The old version will forward requests with a URI prefix that

Reviewer: ```suggestion
URI in the request. The old version forwards requests with a URI prefix that
```

matches any path in `extraWhitelistPaths`. The new version takes regexes from
`extraWhitelistPaths` and forwards only those requests with a URI that exactly

> matches any of the regexes. This changes is required because in the old

Reviewer: ```suggestion
matches any of the regexes. This change is required because in the old
```

> version, `/` will match and forward every request.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
version, `/` matches and forwards every request.
```

Be sure to use single-quoted strings so that escaping is not required. The

> following configurations are equal.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
following configurations are equivalent.
```

Old config:
```yaml
extraWhitelistPaths:
    - "/ui"
    - "/v1/custom"
```

New config:
```yaml
extraWhitelistPaths:
    - '/ui.*'
    - '/v1/custom.*'
```

> ### JVM options

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### JVM options

```

The following JVM options are no longer required:
```
-Dlog.levels-file=XXX
--add-opens=java.base/java.lang=ALL-UNNAMED
--add-opens=java.base/java.net=ALL-UNNAMED
```

> ## Miscellaneous changes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Miscellaneous changes

The following section details a number of other changes.

```

> ### Use port 8080 and 8443

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Use port 8080 and 8443

```

Use port 8080 for HTTP and 8443 for HTTPS in all the documentations, Docker

> image and example config file. The use of port 9080, 9081, 9082 have been

Reviewer: ```suggestion
image and example config file. The use of the ports 9080, 9081, 9082 has been
```

removed. This enhances the consistency throughout the project.

> ### Request logging

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Request logging

```
